Bell Labs and CSP Threads
Russ Cox
rsc@swtch.com

Also available in Serbo-Croatian, Swedish

Introduction

This page is a slice of the history of concurrent programming, focusing on one particular lineage of Hoare's language of communicating sequential processes (CSP) [1] [1a]. Concurrent programming in this style is interesting for reasons not of efficiency but of clarity. That is, it is a widespread mistake to think only of concurrent programming as a means to increase performance, e.g., to overlap disk I/O requests, to reduce latency by prefetching results to expected queries, or to take advantage of multiple processors. Such advantages are important but not relevant to this discussion. After all, they can be realized in other styles, such as asynchronous event-driven programming. Instead, we are interested in concurrent programming because it provides a natural abstraction that can make some programs much simpler.
该页面是并发编程历史的一部分，重点介绍了Hoare的通信顺序进程（CSP）语言[1] [1a]的家系。
这种风格的并发编程很有趣，不是因其效率而是因其清晰。 
有一个普遍的错误想法，是将并发编程仅仅看作提高性能的一种手段，例如，将磁盘I/ O请求重叠，通过预取结果来减少等待时间，或利用多处理器。 这些优点很重要，但与本讨论无关。 毕竟，它们可以以其他样式来实现，例如异步事件驱动的编程。 
相反，我们对并发编程很感兴趣，因为它提供了自然的抽象，可以使某些程序更简单。

大多数计算机科学专业的本科生被迫阅读安德鲁·比雷尔（Andrew Birrell）的“An Introduction to Programming with Threads.”。 SRC线程模型是当前可用的大多数线程包使用的模型。 只不过问题在于它们太底层了。 与Hoare提供的通信原语不同，SRC样式的线程模块中的原语必须与其他技术（通常是共享内存）组合才能有效使用。 通常，程序员倾向于不构建自己的高级构造，而由于需要注意这些低级细节而感到沮丧。

目前，将Birrell的教程排除在外。 这是一个不同的线程模型。 如果您将其作为其他线程模型来处理，则可能会更容易理解。

Communicating Sequential Processes

By 1978, there were many proposed methods in use for communication and synchronization in the context of programming multiprocessors. Shared memory was the most common communication mechanism, and semaphores, critical regions, and monitors were among the synchronization mechanisms. C. A. R. Hoare addressed both issues with a single language primitive: synchronous communication. In Hoare's CSP language, processes communicate by sending or receiving values from named unbuffered channels. Since the channels are unbuffered, the send operation blocks until the value has been transferred to a receiver, thus providing a mechanism for synchronization.

One of Hoare's examples is that of reformatting 80-column cards for printing on a 125-column printer. In his solution, one process reads a card at a time, sending the disassembled contents character by character to a second process. This second process assembles groups of 125 characters, sending the groups to the line printer. This sounds trivial, but in the absence of buffered I/O libraries, the necessary bookkeeping involved in a single-process solution is onerous. In fact, buffered I/O libraries are really just encapsulations of these two sorts of processes that export the single-character communication interface.

As another example, which Hoare credits to Doug McIlroy, consider the generation of all primes less than a thousand. The sieve of Eratosthenes can be simulated by a pipeline of processes executing the following pseudocode:

p = get a number from left neighbor
print p
loop:
    n = get a number from left neighbor
    if (p does not divide n)
        send n to right neighbor
A generating process can feed the numbers 2, 3, 4, ..., 1000 into the left end of the pipeline: the first process in the line eliminates the multiples of 2, the second eliminates the multiples of 3, the third eliminates the multiples of 5, and so on:



至此，示例里的线性管线性质远不能代表CSP的一般性质，但即使限于线性管线，该模型也非常强大。 Unix操作系统众所周知的过滤器和管道方法的成功已经有力地证明了这种能力。[2]实际上，管道早于Hoare的论文。 在1964年10月11日的贝尔实验室内部备忘录中，道格·麦克罗伊（Doug McIlroy）大概提出了未来将成为Unix管道的想法：“我们应该有一些联结程序的方法，就好比花园里的软管，当有必要对数据进行传送时将它拧入另一个部分，以另一种方式。 这也该是I/O能做到的。” [3]


Hoare's communicating processes are more general than typical Unix shell pipelines, since they can be connected in arbitrary patterns. In fact, Hoare gives as an example a 3x3 matrix of processes somewhat like the prime sieve that can be used to multiply a vector by a 3x3 square matrix.

Hoare的通信过程比典型的Unix Shell管道更通用，因为它们可以以任意模式连接。 实际上，Hoare给出了一个3x3的进程矩阵示例，该矩阵有点类似素数筛，可用于将矢量乘以3x3的正方形矩阵。

Of course, the Unix pipe mechanism doesn't require the linear layout; only the shell syntax does. McIlroy reports toying with syntax for a shell with general plumbing early on but not liking the syntax enough to implement it (personal communication, 2011). Later shells did support some restricted forms of non-linear pipelines. Rochkind's 2dsh supports dags; Tom Duff's rc supports trees.

当然，Unix管道机制不一定非得要线性布局。 只不过是因为shell语法这样。 McIlroy报告说，早期使用通用语法对外壳的语法进行了玩弄，但对语法的接受程度不足以实现它（个人交流，2011年）。 后来的shell确实支持非线性管道的某些受限形式。 Rochkind的2dsh支持有向无环图； 汤姆·达夫（Tom Duff）的rc支持树。

Hoare's language was novel and influential, but lacking in a few key aspects. The main defect is that the unbuffered channels used for communication are not first-class objects: they cannot be stored in variables, passed as arguments to functions, or sent across channels. As a result of this, the communication structure must be fixed while writing the program. Hence we must write a program to print the first 1000 primes rather than the first n primes, and to multiply a vector by a 3x3 matrix rather than an nxn matrix.

Pan and Promela

In 1980, barely two years after Hoare's paper, Gerard Holzmann and Rob Pike created a protocol analyzer called pan that takes a CSP dialect as input. Pan's CSP dialect had concatenation, selection, and looping, but no variables. Even so, Holzmann reports that “Pan found its first error in a Bell Labs data-switch control protocol on 21 November 1980. ” [14]. That dialect may well have been the first CSP language at Bell Labs, and it certainly provided Pike with experience using and implementing a CSP-like language, his first of many.

Holzmann's protocol analyzer developed into the Spin model checker and its Promela language, which features first-class channels in the same way as Newsqueak (q.v.).

Newsqueak

Moving in a different direction, Luca Cardelli and Rob Pike developed the ideas in CSP into the Squeak mini-language [4] for generating user interface code. (This Squeak is distinct from the Squeak Smalltalk implementation.) Pike later expanded Squeak into the fully-fledged programming language Newsqueak [5][6] which begat Plan 9's Alef [7] [8], Inferno's Limbo [9], and Google's Go [13]. The main semantic advantage of Newsqueak over Squeak is that Newsqueak treats communications channels as first-class objects: unlike in CSP and Squeak, channels can be stored in variables, passed as arguments to functions, and sent across channels. This in turn enables the programmatic construction of the communication structure, thus allowing the creation of more complex structures than would be reasonable to design by hand. In particular, Doug McIlroy demonstrated how the communication facilities of Newsqueak can be employed to write elegant programs for manipulating symbolic power series [10]. Similar attempts in traditional languages tend to mire in bookkeeping. In a similar vein, Rob Pike demonstrated how the communication facilities can be employed to break out of the common event-based programming model, writing a concurrent window system [11].

Alef

Alef [7] [8] was a language designed by Phil Winterbottom to apply the Newsqueak ideas to a full-fledged systems programming language. Alef has two types of what we have been calling processes: procs and threads. The program is organized into one or more procs, which are shared-memory operating system processes that can be preemptively scheduled. Each proc contains one or more tasks, which are cooperatively scheduled coroutines. Note that each task is assigned to a particular proc: they do not migrate between procs.

The main use of procs is to provide contexts that can block for I/O independently of the main tasks. (Plan 9 has no select call, and even on Unix you need multiple procs if you want to overlap computation with non-network I/O.) The Acme paper [12] has a nice brief discussion of procs and threads, as do the lecture notes about the Plan 9 window system, also mentioned below.

Limbo

The Inferno operating system is a Plan 9 spinoff intended for set-top boxes. Its programming language, Limbo [9], was heavily influenced by Alef. It removed the distinction between procs and tasks, effectively having just procs, though they were of lighter weight than what most people think of as processes. All parallelism is preemptive. It is interesting that despite this, the language provides no real support for locking. Instead, the channel communication typically provides enough synchronization and encourages programmers to arrange that there is always a clear owner for any piece of data. Explicit locking is unnecessary.

Libthread

Back in the Plan 9 world, the Alef compilers turned out to be difficult to maintain as Plan 9 was ported to ever more architectures. Libthread was originally created to port Alef programs to C, so that the Alef compilers could be retired. Alef's procs and tasks are called procs and threads in libthread. The manual page is the definitive reference.

Go

Rob Pike and Ken Thompson moved on to Google and placed CSP at the center of the Go language's concurrency support.

Getting Started

To get a feel for the model, especially how processes and threads interact, it is worth reading the Alef User's Guide [8]. The first thirty slides of this presentation are a good introduction to how Alef constructs are represented in C.

The best examples of the power of the CSP model are McIlroy's and Pike's papers, mentioned above [10] [11].

Rob Pike's home page contains lecture notes from a course on concurrent programming: an introduction, and slides about the two aforementioned papers: squinting and window system. The last of the three provides a good example of how Plan 9 programs typically use procs and tasks.

Rob Pike gave a tech talk at Google that provides a good introduction (57 minute video).

Rob Pike's half of his 2010 Google I/O talk with Russ Cox shows how to use channels and Go's concurrency to implement a load balancing work management system.

Related Resources

John Reppy has applied the same ideas to ML, producing Concurrent ML. He used CML to build, among other things, the eXene multithreaded (non-event-driven) X Window System toolkit.

References

[1] C. A. R. Hoare, “Communicating Sequential Processes,” Communications of the ACM 21(8) (August 1978), 666-677.

[1a]C. A. R. Hoare, Communicating Sequential Processes. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1985.

[2] Michael S. Mahoney, ed., The Unix Oral History Project, Release 0: The Beginning

[3] M. Douglas McIlroy, internal Bell Labs memorandum, October 1964.

[4] Luca Cardelli and Rob Pike, “Squeak: a Language for Communicating with Mice,” Computer Graphics, 19(3) (July 1985: SIGGRAPH '85 Proceedings), 199-204.

[5] Rob Pike, “The Implementation of Newsqueak,” Software--Practice and Experience, 20(7) (July 1990), 649-659.

[6] Rob Pike, “Newsqueak: a Language for Communicating with Mice,” Computing Science Technical Report 143, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, 1989.

[7] Phil Winterbottom, “Alef Language Reference Manual,” in Plan 9 Programmer's Manual: Volume Two, AT&T, Murray Hill, 1995.

[8] Bob Flandrena, “Alef Users' Guide,” in Plan 9 Programmer's Manual: Volume Two, AT&T, Murray Hill, 1995.

[9] Dennis M. Ritchie, “The Limbo Programming Language,” in Inferno Programmer's Manual, Volume 2, Vita Nuova Holdings Ltd., York, 2000.

[10] M. Douglas McIlroy, “Squinting at Power Series,” Software--Practice and Experience, 20(7) (July 1990), 661-683.

[11] Rob Pike, “A Concurrent Window System,” Computing Systems, 2(2) 133-153.

[12] Rob Pike, “Acme: A User Interface for Programmers,” Proceedings of the Winter 1994 USENIX Conference, 223-234.

[13] golang.org, “The Go Programming Language”.

[14] Gerard Holzmann, “Spin's Roots”.

[15] Gerard Holzmann, “Promela Language Reference”.